Respiration and Breathing

Maximizing the Efficiency of Respiration
A challenge of all organisms is the acquisition and distribution of oxygen and the disposal of carbon dioxide
Gas exchange requires special organs which provide intimate contact between the internal and external environment and provide enough surface area for these processes to meet the needs of the organism
Respiration – generally means the uptake of oxygen and disposal of carbon dioxide.  This occurs through a detailed process called cellular respiration where oxygen is needed by cells to use as the final electron acceptor in the production of ATP and carbon dioxide is produced.  
Gas Exchange in Animals
Respiration involves the diffusion of gases across plasma membranes.  
Plasma membranes are surrounded by water to be stable therefore oxygen from air dissolves in the aqueous layer.  
Primitive invertebrates lack special respiratory organs but have developed means to keep their respiratory surfaces moist.  Ex. Earth worm
Gills as Respiratory Structures
Aquatic respiratory organs increase the diffusion surface area by extensions of tissue called gills
The great increase in surface area provided by gills allows organisms to extract oxygen from water than would be possible from their body surface alone
External gills increase surface area, but the organism must always be kept moving because oxygen in stagnant water can be quickly depleted.
The external gills are also easily damaged
Gills
Gills are evaginated structures (outgrowths from the body) that have large surface areas over which gas exchange occurs.
Inside the gills, a circulatory system removes the oxygen and delivers waste CO2. 
In some animals, such as Polychaete worms (Annelids), the gills are external and unprotected.  In other animals such as fish, gills are internal and protected.

In fish, water enters the mouth, passes over the gills, and exits through the gill cover (operculum). Countercurrent exchange between the opposing movements of water and blood maximizes diffusion of O2 in and CO2 out. 


Respiration in Amphibians
Very unique organisms that have the ability to acquire gases through two means:  the lungs and the skin.
Amphibians – force air into their lungs by creating a greater-than-atmospheric pressure in the air outside their lungs.  Air is filled in their buccal cavity, they close their nose and mouth, floor of mouth is raised, and the air is forced into their lungs.
Skin must be kept moist for diffusion to take place.  This is particularly important for times of hibernation when some burrow under mud at the bottom of ponds
Respiration in Mammals
Mammals have higher metabolic rates to produce and sustain their body temp and thus require a more efficient respiratory system
Lungs of mammals are packed with million of tiny air sacs called alveoli providing an enormous surface area for gas exchange
Flow of Air
Air is brought into the alveoli through a system of passages:

Mouth/Nose  pharynx  larynx  trachea  bronchi  bronchioles  alveoli
Features of the respiratory system
Nostril – conducts air into hollow nasal cavity.
-best way to intake air as it cleans and purifies air through this passage.

Nose Hair
Nose hairs help to filter out dust and dirt particles from entering the respiratory tract
Hairs are covered in mucus that trap particles as they are breathed in

Turbinates – Thin bones found in the nasal cavity that increase surface area and secrete mucous.  This helps to moisten the air.  The turbinates are lined with capillaries that warm and increase humidity of incoming air.

Sinuses 
Main function is to produce mucus that moisturizes the inside of the nose.
The mucus layer protects the nose from pollutants, micro-organisms, dust and dirt
Pharynx
Pharynx- connects the mouth to the throat
Epiglottis
Glottis – opening to the trachea
Epiglottis – flap of cartilage located behind the tongue that helps prevent food from entering trachea



Larynx
Larynx – houses the vocal cords.  
There are two folded structures of the vocal cords.  When you breathe normally there is a large gap between the cords.  When you speak, muscles contract bringing cords closer.  The air that passes through them vibrates the cords producing sound.


Trachea
Trachea – Flexible tube that is the passageway of air.
Supported by semi-circular cartilage rings to ensure it does not collapse with the passage of food in the esophagus. 
lined with ciliated cells that secrete mucous.   
Ciliated Cells
Ciliated Cells – These cells secrete mucous.  
The mucous traps the foreign particles. 
Continual sweeping of the cilia propels these particles back to the nose and throat where they can be expelled.



Bronchi
Bronchi – 2 smaller branches of the of the trachea
Bronchioles – tiny subdivisions of the bronchi
Alveoli
Alveoili – grape like clusters of tiny sacs at the end of the bronchioles. 
These sacs are always kept moist.  
This is the site of gas exchange.  
The sacs provide an abundance of surface area for the exchange of gases. 
They are surrounded by capillaries.




Lungs
Lungs are a flexible membrane that allow expansion and contraction.  The right lung has 3 lobes, and the left lung has 2 lobes.  The lungs house part of the bronchi, bronchioles and alveoli.
The pleura is a layer of tissue that envelopes the lungs.  It is a flexible membrane that allows the lungs to expand and contract.  Each pleuron is made up of two layers separated by a film of lubricating fluid.  

